Let's talk about the static keyword
as it applies to methods and fields.
So you can apply the keyword static
to the following elements of class,
a field, an initializer, method and a nested type
for class, interface or enum.
By declaring something static,
what you're doing is associating the element
with the class and not an instance of the class.
The elements exist and are available to be used
even if you never create a single instance of the class.
What you can't do is use the modifier static
on an outer class itself or a local variable.
So the modifier only has a meaning
when it describes the relationship to a class
and its elements.
So I'm gonna link this article documentation
in the Resources section of this video.
We're gonna summarise it here as follows.
We derive the following scenarios
of when a class itself gets initialised.
A class or interface type T will be initialised immediately
before the first occurrence of any of the following.
T is a class and an instance of T is created.
A static method declared by T is invoked.
A static field declared by T is assigned.
or a static field declared by T is used
and the field is not a constant variable.
Now these rules are nuanced
and I'm going to show you examples of each
in this video and probably the next one or two videos.
You access a static element
with the exception of an initializer
by calling it with the dot operator
on the class name itself.
A constructor cannot be static because a constructor
is used in creating an instance
and I've already said that to anything that's modified
the static key word will not be associated with the instance
although it is available for use by the instance.
So it turns out we've used a static method
in almost every example of code I've demonstrated
so far in the course and that's the main method
which is a course used to execute a class.
The main method is static and callable
without executing an instance of the class itself
and I have also reviewed examples of
static fields and static initializers briefly.
But in this video and as I said the next one or two,
I'm gonna focus entirely on static elements
and when they get initialised and also how you can use them.
So we're still in the methods project.
We're going to create a new class
called StaticElementTests.
All right, so lesson code,
so this code consists of two classes.
So we've got a class on screen there StaticStuff
and this has got two static variables
and you can see both of those now on screen.
It's also got a static initializer
which we'll use to let us know
when the class is initialised.
That's more of the static method
that prints out a statement for us.
So scrolling down a bit, you can see
the second class there StaticElementTests
has a main method with a single System.out.printIn statement
printing the static field appName from StaticStuff.
So if you run this...
So let me make the call to access the static field
for the first time the class was initialised as you can see.
All right, so let's just confirm though
that's it's not initialised automatically
before any code is executed.
Let's do something before accessing the static field.
So I'm going to make a change to the main method
to achieve this.
Then what you do is kind of follow it
just to do something and then we'll
access the static field on main stuff.
So I'm gonna paste that in
above the existing code.
And as you can see in the comment,
we're just adding some work for us
just to prove StaticStuff isn't initialised on start-up.
We'll run this now.
So if you still see from this app
that StaticStuff wasn't initialised
until we try to access the StaticField,
and of course that's the kind
that we're accessing that field on line 37.
All right, so let's change the code again.
What we're gonna do is instead
share the class of top StaticStuff.
I'm gonna also paste that before the last one.
Then access our StaticField app name
and there's the code.
I can see we're printing an object of top StaticStuff
and printing it out from the code.
And again looking at the app now,
this proves that the class was initialised on the line
where we credit in it so the class this time
and not when we access the StaticField app name.
That's obviously because of the new code
we added on line 37.
Let's also change StaticStuff and use the instance instead
so we'll change that to s.
Let's run the code and see what happens down here
without accessing it statically.
We're running it by the instance.
And you can see that the app remains the same.
All right, so now let's just declare and object
of top StaticStuff,
but this time we won't instantiate it.
So what I'm gonna do is change the code.
Specifically this code here
as follows.
So now you can see we're declaring an object
but not instantiating it
and we'll run the code.
Now this app will show that just declaring an object
of top StaticStuff and setting it to null
doesn't trigger the class's initialization.
That didn't happen until later on.
Another interesting point from the code above there
is that even though s is a null object
we can still use s.appName to access
a static field on the class.
All right, so let's explore another nuance
of class initialization.
We're gonna change the field appName in StaticStuff
to also be final.
Let's go ahead and do that.
So we'll come back up here.
So appName on line 11,
let's just add final to that.
A static final.
Run the code.
So what's interesting here,
while the static initializer was never executed,
and that's because the class hasn't yet been initialised,
we need to find a final static field on a class.
The class does not have to be intialized
for the application to use that field
cause of course once we set the value
which we've done on line 11,
it can no longer be changed.
Right, so continuing on with the class initialization rule,
we now set a variable to be a static field
as opposed to our final static field.
Because specifically what we're gonna be doing is
using this static int on line 24.
So I'm gonna come down to our main method.
We're gonna add this below the,
accessing the static member.
Okay, so there's the code.
Run the code.
And you can see here now that the class was initialised
when this line was encountered
accessing the counter static field that was defined
confirming that assigning a static field
to a variable triggers initialization.
All right, so finally now, let's execute a static method.
So we're gonna change the main method.
We're gonna delete some of this code.
I'm just gonna comment that code out for now.
We're gonna replace that with this code
that I'm pasting in.
And the code's obviously just accessing the static method.
So if you run this code,
you can see the class was initialised
where we call it the static method printAppName.
Let me just go up and check that method out again.
You can see that there on screen.
All right, so what happens when we create
multiple instances of the StaticStuff class?
Let's change the method to achieve that.
We're gonna come down to the main method
and I'm going to replace some code,
so what I'll do is I'll comment this out as well
and I'll comment out our call to the method
and let's paste its code.
All right, so we're now creating multiple instances
of the StaticStuff class.
Let's run this.
And we confirm that the class
is initialised once at the time
we instantiate the first object.
We can also see that from the static field counter
it's not getting inclemented
and that's because the static initializer executes
only once and not for every instance that's being created
as is the case here in the code
that we've added to the main method.
Let's finish the video here because it's getting quite long
and we'll continue on with this in the next one.